# LoadPrediction

Predicting the electricity consumption for individual household appliances using disaggregated energy data has attracted a lot of research in the recent years. Apart from time series analysis approaches such as ARIMA (Autoregressive integrated moving average) machine learning models perform better for time series forecasting. Purpose of this project is predicting future electricity demand in a household using machine learning approaches such as artificial neural networks and support vector regression and distinguishing factor between the approaches is the mean absolute performance error as well as the accuracy of predictions. 

In this project the machine learning models explored include regression based which are Gaussian process, random forest, support vector and K nearest neighbours with time-based features that strengthen these models and the accuracy of results. Key contributions of this project include 1. Testing and determining the best machine learning model for predicting household electricity consumption. 2. In course of building the machine learning models finding out the optimum set of features and hyper-parameters that influence the resulting predictions and yield maximum accuracy. 3. To further explore aggregate consumption for each household use K-Means Clustering algorithm to find groups of electricity usage at different hours of the day in order to discover the pattern of electricity usage for demand side power prediction with greater accuracy. 

# Introduction

As the move towards renewable energy sources such as solar has increased in recent years so has the need for efficient energy management of residential and industrial buildings. Optimal energy management can be achieved by accurate demand side load forecasting. The problem of predicting household energy consumption using individual appliance consumption has been addressed in previous research using energy load disaggregation to identify individual appliance’s consumption profile. An interesting research has also dealt with deriving properties or characteristics of residential buildings such as number of occupants, their salaries and power usage using load profiles. This can also be used for planning electricity production beforehand by ascertaining the consumer profiles from their previous usage profiles. Energy demand side technology has also been evolving into smart grid. The technology enables now the consumers to interact with electric utility using advanced metering infrastructure (AMI). AMI’s smart meter at customer premise are continuously gathering energy data which is uploaded to central server. Consumer data allows the utilities to calculate the electricity demand in real-time. 

The key factor in determining the demand side energy requirements has been average peak load at consumer side. Earlier the utilities carried out load shedding in times of high energy usage with the advent of smart meters newer approach of rewarding consumers who shift their load to low peak hours has been adopted. This scheme of shifting load from periods of high demand to periods of low demand also tends to reduce customer satisfaction by not taking into consideration their usage habits. Thus, to decrease electricity costs and simultaneously maintain user contentment, user’s consumption habits must be taken into account when allocating energy resources.
 The problem of system level demand forecasting is very different from individual household demand forecasting. System level demand forecasting is smooth since it’s the average of consumption of all the houses whereas individual level differs in the sense that changes are sudden throughout the day. Moreover, the electricity demand for different households is overall differing in the context of different activity patterns at each household. 

The use of smart meters brings several advantages which range from automated billing to reduction in consumption. Providing users with the ability to match their current consumption pattern with costs of maintaining this pattern in future allows them to adjust their consumption based on timings of day and subsequent cost of electricity. Residential power load forecasting (RPLF) is an important field to which this project contributes in several interesting ways. 
The purpose of this project is to predict energy consumption of household appliances using machine learning algorithms evaluate these predictions to determine the most suitable machine learning algorithm with only the previous consumption data and not factors such as outside temperature or occupancy.

The goal of this project can be achieved by taking into consideration supervised machine learning algorithms such as density estimation, clustering and reinforced learning to predict a target output. The target output will be the power consumed/cost of energy/predicted usage pattern for the specific appliance in question. The project will use public datasets for appliance usage as they have information collected over a greater length of time. REFIT Electrical load measurements dataset has been chosen as the data set as it has measurement sampling at 8s interval over a prolonged period of 2 years. It also has collected data separately for each appliance with the aggregated data for the whole house.

In this project the data is preprocessed to gather insights into daily, monthly and yearly usage for the houses present in the dataset as well as the individual appliances that make up the houses. Initially, the data for one house is explored and after dividing the aggregate consumption data into training and test sets machine learning models are trained. The prediction test sets are used to verify. After the result comparison machine learning model with highest prediction accuracy is selected to predict consumption of the rest of the residential buildings with similar features in the dataset. Various machine learning algorithms are explored for the particular problem of predicting each individual appliance usage. Non-intrusive load monitoring (NILM) has earlier been used which finds out each individual appliance consumption from overall aggregated consumption by examining the changes in voltage/current over time. For this project there is already power consumption data collected from sensors on individual appliances so NILM is not required.
    
    The machine learning models tested include Gaussian process regression, linear regression, K Nearest Neighbors, Random Forests, Support Vector Regression and Recurrent neural networks using LSTM cells. 
    
    The structure of the project is organized as follows: section 1, the data preprocessing steps are described and exploratory analysis is performed to derive hourly/monthly consumption patterns for individual appliances. Furthermore, the machine learning approaches are implemented in python to predict the electricity consumption pattern based on historical power consumption data alone and results are included. Clustering is done on the whole dataset to reveal which usage cluster different households fall into at different hours of the day. In section 2 the accuracy results of machine learning approaches are discussed. Finally, section 3 concludes the project. 
